<!--
.. title: 003 - How long does it take to stop a cargo ship?
.. slug: 003
.. date: 2022-04-13 13:32:05 UTC-04:00
.. tags: draft
.. category: draft
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

A couple of weeks ago, I started a draft for a post I meant to dedicate to the notion of transition. But the resulting text consisted mostly of an enumeration of all the projects in which I used to be involved, instead of actually talking about transition.  

As I previously mentionned, I officially enrolled in a PhD program, in France, in November 2021 and, in Canada, in January 2022. All in all, that would be about six months ago.

To be honest, stating this doesn't come without frustration. Why? Well, because, then I can't help wonder: "what have I been up to this whole time?"

I have a notion that this question will haunt me until the end of this adventure, so it might be necessary to start adressing it right away.  

I was frustrated with November and December 2021, because I felt (wrongly now that I think of it) like I was just caught up in wrapping up ending projects instead of "working" on my new project. So, intuitively I would respond to my initial question with a list of all the things I have completed/started during this period as a way to reassure myself. As in "See? I have done plenty of stuff!" I mean, I wouldn't be lying, I did a crazy ton of things in relation with my current project. But seeing what I ended up doing in my original draft, such a list would likely lead me to also enumerating the projects I was *still* a part of in November, or even the ones I am still currently a part of, wheras, this is not really my point.  

It takes time to set up a PhD, and I plan on dwelling more on this in the next post. Likewise, activites related to previous research don't always suddenly stop from one day to the next, especially when they are actually extremely tied to the topic you plan to which you are about to dedicate 4 years of your life. To put in another way, we could say that it is wrong to think that I *started* a PhD in November last year: rather, I *transitionned* into one. And even 6 months later, even when it's much calmer than it was back in November, I am certainly still working on this transition

It is true that working in a field so closely related to activities I have conducted previously presents many advantages: the familiarity I have with the topic, the knowledge I have of a portion of the network of people working in that field, and overall a precious hands-on experience with the technologies involved. On top of that, since I partially remain in the same team as before (ALMAnaCH at Inria), I was able to start reading and writing up ideas for my future research as early as Spring 2021.  

Yet, this doesn't mean that I am exempted from the overwhelming feeling that time is going fast and the worry that I'll later regret not having executed more. Also, it sure as hell did not exempt me from spending hours and hours in paperwork!

Unfortunately, some of the projects I alluded to earlier sometimes backfire with sharp and untimely deadlines. So, two weeks ago when I was working on this post, I felt overloaded with the overlapping of deadlines inherited from my previous activities, those coming up because of the courses I am taking this semester at the UdeM, the ones related to administrative processes that are still underway, and a somewhat everlasting music singing in the back of my head that if I'm putting "this little effort" into my research, then I should "at least do some readings."

I had this image in my mind, then, that you don't stop a cargo ship all at once. That there is an inertia that you have to compose with. At that time I thought such an image was necessary to justify the fact that I don't feel like I have as many accomplishments as I would like to show after these past 6 months. But having now reprocess all this, on a quieter week, and reaching the end of this post, I feel like such an image is no longer necessary.  

Manly because I posed the problem with the wrong terms: I probably only need to be a tiny bit more organized and, in order to better asses my progress, to more clearly define my short and long term objectives.  

To finish this post, a summary of my mindset, in general and for the PhD project: I don't want to be running everywhere or non-stop during the 3 years to come. I wand to take my time whenever I need to. I want to learn to compose my schedule. I want to learn to say no. I want to be comfortable with my experience as a PhD student. I want it to be fulfilling and not exhausting. I want to prefer well-being and efficiency, rather than performance.  


