<!--
.. title: 005 - Visa and Immigration
.. slug: 005
.. date: 2022-07-28 09:52:37 UTC-04:00
.. tags: draft, paperworking
.. category: draft
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
-->

In the previous post, I introduced the functioning of an international cotutelle and focused on the administrative details from the universities' point of view. Now, I would like to take the time to list and explain the other administratives requirement, which are not always foreseen. 

First, immigration. Unless you are a citizen of both the countries involved in the cotutelle, you will need at least one visa. Maybe two if you are a citizen of neither. I only needed a visa for Canada since I am already a French citizen. So, as soon as I got my letter of acceptance from the University of Montreal, I started the paperwork in order to obtain a Student Visa (*Permis d'Études*) covering the full duration of my studies. There is a lot of documentation available on the main steps, either from the Univerisy of Montreal (http://www.bei.umontreal.ca/bei/form_info.htm) or from the [canadian immigration services](https://www.canada.ca/fr/immigration-refugies-citoyennete/services/etudier-canada/permis-etudes/presenter-demande.html).

There are sub-paperwork requirements hidden inside some of the most visible steps. In order to obtain a visa from Canada to go to Québec, I had to gather the following papers:

- my passport (which I had recently renewed so it will remain valid until way after the end of my PhD adventures);
- US format id photos;
- proof that I could fund my stay in Canada and pay my tickets back to France (which means proving you have enough savings, that someone with enough savings/income will be supporting you, or that you will have a guaranteed income during your stay);
- the letter of acceptance from the University of Montreal;
- and the "*Certificat d'Acceptation du Québec*" (CAQ), which is essentially like asking a visa to Quebec (Province level) before asking for a visa to Canada (Federal level).

Because it was my first time requesting a visa to Canada, I also had to get my biometrics collected. It cost me 85$CA and I had to make an appointment at a dedicated center in Clichy (next to Paris) where my fingerprints where taken along with some photos. There were very little people because a new COVID waive was threatening travels abroad: I believe the whole appointment lasted less than 15 minutes.  

Similarly, getting the CAQ was not complicated but it also cost me additional fees (117$CA) and meant I had to do extra paperwork. In order to obtain a CAQ, I had to provide:

- contact information;
- again, a proof that I could pay for my stay in Québec and pay my tickets back to France;
- a copy of my passport;
- US format id photos;
- and a form which I first had to fill [online](http://www.immigration-quebec.gouv.qc.ca/fr/services/caq-electronique/index.html)

The process was farely quick: on the 13th of September, I turned in a pre-request and paid the 117$CA fees to obtain an application number, then the next day I was given access to a plateform where I could upload my documents. I did so on the 17th, got a read confirmation on the 23d and a digital copy of the CAQ on the 24th. It took less than 2 weeks. As a French citizen, I was able to avoid additional steps like undergoing a medical examination or having to request an ETA (Electronical Traveling Authorization).  

For the visa, I created an account on the dedicated platform on the 30th of September. It allowed me to start a session to request the visa, upload my files, access new forms I had to fill and pay the fees which were 150$CA. Only once I had done this was I able to make the appointment for the biometrics: I had to wait for an email giving me instructions, which I received on the next day. My appointment was scheduled for the 6th of October, then the next day I received a confirmation that my request had been approved. At that point, I expected to have to go to the Canadian Embassy to receive my visa, like I had to for a US visa a few years ago, but in stead, I was informed that such appointment would take place when I would cross the Canadian border and that I had until the 15th of January 2026 to do so.

I did cross the border in January 2022 upon landing at the Montreal international airport. Before I could exit the airport, I had to go to a specific area of the building dedicated to immigration services. I waited to be called at the front desk for about 45 minutes, then had to present various papers, including, above all, my passport, the letter acceptance from the University of Montreal, the official CAQ (which I had received by mail in the meantime), the notification of acceptance for the study visa as well as any proof of funding for my stay and information regarding my travel back to France. Essentially, they verified that everything I had submitted was true and asked me for the address where I would stay in Canada. I believe I stayed at 1h30 at the immigration services in the airport and eventually was issued my official *Permis d'Études* (US Letter format...).

All in all, obtaining the visa cost me 352$CA but the process took less than a month and I was able to take advantage of the COVID situation: delays were shorter because less people were traveling and many process had been fully digitized which meant I didn't have to send paper by post mail and was instead able to submit their digitized version online. 

